---
layout: post
title: "Publishing Elixir Packages"
date: 2016-08-21 17:28:33
tags: programming elixir
---

You have some Elixir code in a Mix project and pushed to a Github repository. You're code-complete-ish and ready to release your shiny and fabulous v0 to the world. Read on!

### Documentation: Make it easy for people to use your code

#### Give some love to your README

The README is often the first aspect of your project that someone will see. So, make sure it answers all the basic questions a potential user would have. Ideally, a README includes the following information:

- A **brief summary** of what the code does.
- **Installation instructions**. How does a user install your code?
  - This content is auto-generated by Mix if you started your project with <code>mix new <project-name></code>, although it may need some tweaks.
- **Usage instructions**. An overview of how to use your project once it has been installed.
  - What are the main functions a user would be interested in? How are those functions used, and what do they return?
- **Contributing**. If you're interested in contributions from others, you should write an invitation in the README and some instructions about how to get started - including how to run the test suite, etc. You should also include a link to a code of conduct.

#### Generate docs with ExDoc

Add the ex_doc dependency to your <code>mix.exs</code> file:

{% highlight elixir %}
{:ex_doc, ">= 0.0.0", only: :dev}
{% endhighlight %}

Then, run <code>mix deps.get</code>. You can now generate documentation with the following command: <code>mix docs</code>. All of your modules and public methods will have rudimentary documentation already, but you can beef it up with <code>@doc</code> and <code>@moduledoc</code> tags. See the [Elixir School Documentation page](https://elixirschool.com/lessons/basics/documentation) for demonstrations of how to use those tags in your code.

### Publish your code to Hex

Follow the steps [here](https://hex.pm/docs/publish) to register, add the needed metadata to <code>mix.exs</code>, and publish. 🚢

### Publish your documentation to Hexdocs

Make the lovely documentation you generated available to the world by running <code>mix hex.docs</code>.
